# Handling Errors and Signals

<P>Most of the examples in this book have been ignoring the fact that errors can 
and probably will occur. An error can occur because the directory you are trying 
to use does not exist, the disk is full, or any of a thousand other reasons. 
Quite often, you won't be able to do anything to recover from an error, and your 
program should exit. However, exiting after displaying a user-friendly error 
message is much preferable than waiting until the operating system or Perl's own 
error handling takes over. 
<P>After looking at errors generated by function calls, we'll look at a way to 
prevent certain normally fatal activities - like dividing by zero - from 
stopping the execution of your script; this is by using the <TT>eval()</TT> 
function. 
<P>Then, you'll see what a signal is and how to use the <TT>%SIG</TT> 
associative array to create a signal handling function. 

## Checking for Errors

There is only one way to check for errors in any programming language. You need to test the return 
values of the functions that you call. Most functions return zero or false when 
something goes wrong. So when using a critical function like <TT>open()</TT> or 
<TT>sysread()</TT>, checking the return value helps to ensure that your program 
will work properly. 
<P>Perl has two special variables - <TT>$?</TT> and <TT>$!</TT> - that help in 
finding out what happened after an error has occurred. The <TT>$?</TT> variable 
holds the status of the last pipe close, back-quote string, or <TT>system()</TT> 
function. The <TT>$!</TT> variable can be used in either a numeric or a string 
context. In a numeric context it holds the current value of <TT>errno</TT>. If 
used in a string context, it holds the error string associated with 
<TT>errno</TT>. The variable, <I>errno</I>, is pre-defined variable that can 
sometimes be used to determine the last error that took place. 
<P>
<TABLE cellSpacing=0 cellPadding=0 border=0>
  <TBODY>
  <TR>
    <TD bgColor=black><FONT color=tomato size=4><B>Caution</B></FONT></TD></TR>
  <TR>
    <TD bgColor=tomato>You can't rely on these variables to check the status 
      of pipes, back-quoted strings, or the <TT>system()</TT> function when 
      executing scripts under the Windows operating system. My recommendation is 
      to capture the output of the back-quoted string and check it directly for 
      error messages. Of course, the command writes its errors to 
      <TT>STDERR</TT> and then can't trap them, and you're out of 
  luck.</TD></TR></TBODY></TABLE>
<P>Once you detect an error and you can't correct the problem without outside 
intervention, you need to communicate the problem to the user. This is usually 
done with the <TT>die()</TT> and <TT>warn()</TT> functions. 

## Example: Using the errno Variable

When an error occurs, it is common practice for UNIX-based 
functions and programs to set a variable called <TT>errno</TT> to reflect which 
error has occurred. If <TT>errno=2</TT>, then your script tried to access a 
directory or file that did not exist. Table 13.1 lists ten possible values the 
<TT>errno</TT> variable can take, but there are hundreds more. If you are 
interested in seeing all the possible error values, run the program in Listing 
13.1. 
<P>
<TABLE cellPadding=10 border=1>
  <CAPTION>Table 13.1 - Ten Possible Values for <TT>errno</TT></CAPTION>
  <TBODY>
  <TR>
    <TH align=left></TT>Value </TH>
    <TH align=left>Description</TH></TR>
  <TR>
    <TD vAlign=top>1 </TD>
    <TD vAlign=top>Operation not permitted</TD></TR>
  <TR>
    <TD vAlign=top>2 </TD>
    <TD vAlign=top>No such file or directory</TD></TR>
  <TR>
    <TD vAlign=top>3 </TD>
    <TD vAlign=top>No such process</TD></TR>
  <TR>
    <TD vAlign=top>4 </TD>
    <TD vAlign=top>Interrupted function call</TD></TR>
  <TR>
    <TD vAlign=top>5 </TD>
    <TD vAlign=top>Input/output error</TD></TR>
  <TR>
    <TD vAlign=top>6 </TD>
    <TD vAlign=top>No such device or address</TD></TR>
  <TR>
    <TD vAlign=top>7 </TD>
    <TD vAlign=top>Arg list too long</TD></TR>
  <TR>
    <TD vAlign=top>8 </TD>
    <TD vAlign=top>Exec format error</TD></TR>
  <TR>
    <TD vAlign=top>9 </TD>
    <TD vAlign=top>Bad file descriptor</TD></TR>
  <TR>
    <TD vAlign=top>10 </TD>
    <TD vAlign=top>No child processes</TD></TR></TBODY></TABLE>
<P>
<TABLE cellSpacing=0 cellPadding=0 border=0>
  <TBODY>
  <TR>
    <TD bgColor=black><FONT color=blanchedalmond 
      size=4><B>Pseudocode</B></FONT></TD></TR>
  <TR>
    <TD bgColor=blanchedalmond><TT>
      <P>Loop from 1 to 10,000 using <TT>$!</TT> as the loop variable. 
      <P>Evaluate the <TT>$!</TT> variable in a string context so that 
      <TT>$errText</TT> is assigned the error message associated with the value 
      of <TT>$!</TT>. 
      <P>Use <TT>chomp()</TT> to eliminate possible newlines at the end of an 
      error message. Some of the messages have newlines, and some don't. 
      <P>Print the error message if the message is not <TT>Unknown Error</TT>. 
      Any error value not used by the system defaults to <TT>Unknown Error</TT>. 
      Using the <TT>if</TT> statement modifier ensures that only valid error 
      messages are displayed.</TT></P></TD></TR></TBODY></TABLE>
<P>
<TABLE cellSpacing=0 cellPadding=0 border=0>
  <TBODY>
  <TR>
    <TD bgColor=black><FONT color=#fffaa0 size=4><B>
      <P>Listing 13.1-13LST01.PL - A Program to List All Possible Values for 
      <TT>errno</B></FONT></TT></P></TD></TR>
  <TR>
    <TD bgColor=#fffaa0><B><PRE><BR>
<P>for ($! = 1; $! &lt;= 10000; $!++) {
    $errText = $!;
    chomp($errText);
    printf("%04d: %s\n", $!, $errText) if $! ne "Unknown Error";
}</B></P></PRE></TT></TD></TR></TBODY></TABLE>
<P>Under Windows 95, this program prints 787 error messages. Most of them are 
totally unrelated to Perl. 
<H3><A name="Example: Using the or Logical Operator">Example: Using the 
<I>or</I> Logical Operator</A></H3>Perl provides a special logical operator that 
is ideal for testing the return values from functions. You may recall that the 
<TT>or</TT> operator will evaluate only the right operand if the left operand is 
false. Because most functions return false when an error occurs, you can use the 
<TT>or</TT> operator to control the display of error messages. For example: 
<P><B><PRE>chdir('/user/printer') or print("Can't connect to Printer dir.\n");</PRE></B>This 
code prints only the error message if the program can't change to the 
<TT>/user/printer</TT> directory. Unfortunately, simply telling the user what 
the problem is, frequently, is not good enough. The program must also exit to 
avoid compounding the problems. You could use the comma operator to add a second 
statement to the right operand of the <TT>or</TT> operator. Adding an 
<TT>exit()</TT> statement to the previous line of code looks like this: 
<P><B><PRE>chdir('/usr/printer') or print("failure\n"), exit(1);
print("success\n");</PRE></B>I added the extra <TT>print</TT> statement to prove 
that the script really exits. If the printer directory does not exist, the 
second <TT>print</TT> statement is not executed. 
<P>
<TABLE cellSpacing=0 cellPadding=0 border=0>
  <TBODY>
  <TR>
    <TD bgColor=black><FONT color=lightcyan size=4><B>Note</B></FONT></TD></TR>
  <TR>
    <TD bgColor=lightcyan>At the shell or DOS, a zero return value means that 
      the program ended successfully. While inside a Perl script, a zero return 
      value frequently means an error has occurred. Be careful when dealing with 
      return values; you should always check your documentation. 
</TD></TR></TBODY></TABLE>
<P>Using the comma operator to execute two statements instead of one is awkward 
and prone to misinterpretation when other programmers look at the script. 
Fortunately, you can use the <TT>die()</TT> function to get the same 
functionality. 
<H3><A name="Example: Using the die() Function">Example: Using the <I>die()</I> 
Function</A></H3>The <TT>die()</TT> function is used to quit your script and 
display a message for the user to read. Its syntax is 
<P><B><PRE>die(LIST);</PRE></B>The elements of <TT>LIST</TT> are printed to 
<TT>STDERR</TT>, and then the script will exit, setting the script's return 
value to <TT>$!</TT> (<TT>errno</TT>). If you were running the Perl script from 
inside a C program or UNIX script, you could then check the return value to see 
what went wrong. 
<P>The simplest way to use the <TT>die()</TT> function is to place it on the 
right side of the <TT>or</TT> operator 
<P><B><PRE>chdir('/user/printer') or die();</PRE></B>which displays 
<P><B><PRE>Died at test.pl line 2.</PRE></B>if the <TT>/user/printer</TT> directory 
does not exist. The message is not too informative, so you should always include 
a message telling the user what happened. If you don't know what the error might 
be, you can always display the error text associated with <TT>errno</TT>. For 
example: 
<P><B><PRE>chdir('/user/printer') or die("$!");</PRE></B>This line of code displays 
<P><B><PRE>No such file or directory at test.pl line 2.</PRE></B>This error message is 
a bit more informative. It's even better if you append the text <TT>, 
stopped</TT> to the error message like this: 
<P><B><PRE>chdir('/user/printer') or die("$!, stopped");</PRE></B>which displays 
<P><B><PRE>No such file or directory, stopped at test.pl line 2.</PRE></B>Appending 
the extra string makes the error message look a little more professional. If you 
are really looking for informative error messages, try this: 
<P><B><PRE>$code = "chdir('/user/printer')";
eval($code) or die("PROBLEM WITH LINE: $code\n$! , stopped");</PRE></B>which 
displays the following: 
<P><B><PRE>PROBLEM WITH LINE: chdir('/user/printer')
No such file or directory , stopped at test.pl line 3.</PRE></B>The 
<TT>eval()</TT> function is discussed in the section "<A 
href="ch13.htm#Example: Using the eval() Function">Example: 
Using the eval() Function</A>" later in this chapter. Therefore, I won't explain 
what this code is doing other than to say that the <TT>eval()</TT> function 
executes its arguments as semi-isolated Perl code. First, the Perl code in 
<TT>$code</TT> is executed and then, if an error arises, the Perl code in 
<TT>$code</TT> is displayed as text by the <TT>die()</TT> function. 
<P>If you don't want <TT>die()</TT> to add the script name and line number to 
the error, add a newline to the end of the error message. For example: 
<P><B><PRE>chdir('/user/printer') or die("$!\n");</PRE></B>displays the following: 
<P><B><PRE>No such file or directory</PRE></B>
<H3><A name="Example: Using the warn() Function">Example: Using the 
<I>warn()</I> Function</A></H3>The <TT>warn()</TT> function has the same 
functionality that <TT>die()</TT> does except the script is not exited. This 
function is better suited for nonfatal messages like low memory or disk space 
conditions. The next example tries to change to the <TT>/text</TT> directory. If 
the connect fails, the consequences are not fatal because the files can still be 
written to the current directory. 
<P><B><PRE>chdir('/text') or warn("Using current directory instead of /text, warning");</PRE></B>This 
line of code displays 
<P><B><PRE>Using current directory instead of /text, warning at test.pl line 2.</PRE></B>if 
the <TT>/text</TT> directory does not exist. As with <TT>die()</TT>, you can 
eliminate the script name and line number by ending your error message with a 
newline. You could also use the <TT>$!</TT> variable to display the system error 
message. 

## Trapping Fatal Errors

There are times when reporting fatal errors and then exiting the script are not 
appropriate responses to a problem. For example, your script might try to use 
the <TT>alarm()</TT> function, which is not supported in some versions of Perl. 
Normally, using an unsupported function causes your problem to exit, but you can 
use the <TT>eval()</TT> function to trap the error and avoid ending the script. 
<P>The <TT>eval()</TT> function accepts an expression and then executes it. Any 
errors generated by the execution will be isolated and not affect the main 
program. However, all function definitions and variable modifications do affect 
the main program. 
<H3><A name="Example: Using the eval() Function">Example: Using the 
<I>eval()</I> Function</A></H3>You can use the <TT>eval()</TT> function to trap 
a normally fatal error: 
<P><B><PRE></B>eval { alarm(15) };
warn() if $@;

eval { print("The print function worked.\n"); };
warn() if $@;</PRE></B>This program displays the following: 
<P><B><PRE>The Unsupported function alarm function is unimplemented at test.pl line 2.
        ...caught at test.pl line 3.
The print function worked.</PRE></B>The <TT>$@</TT> special variable holds the 
error message, if any, returned by the execution of the expression passed to the 
<TT>eval()</TT> function. If the expression is evaluated correctly, then 
<TT>$@</TT> is an empty string. You probably remember that an empty string is 
evaluated as false when used as a conditional expression. 
<P>In an earlier section, "<A 
href="ch13.htm#Example: Using the die() Function">Example: 
Using the die() Function</A>," you saw the following code snippet being used: 
<P><B><PRE>$code = "chdir('/user/printer')";
eval($code) or die("PROBLEM WITH LINE: $code\n$! , stopped");</PRE></B>This 
program shows that <TT>eval()</TT> will execute a line of code that is inside a 
variable. You can use this capability in many different ways besides simply 
trapping fatal errors. The program in Listing 13.2 presents a prompt and 
executes Perl code as you type it. Another way of looking at this program is 
that it is an interactive Perl interpreter. 
<P>
<TABLE cellSpacing=0 cellPadding=0 border=0>
  <TBODY>
  <TR>
    <TD bgColor=black><FONT color=blanchedalmond 
      size=4><B>Pseudocode</B></FONT></TD></TR>
  <TR>
    <TD bgColor=blanchedalmond><TT>
      <P>Loop until the user enters <TT>exit</TT>. 
      <P>Print the prompt. 
      <P>Get a line of input from <TT>STDIN</TT> and remove the ending linefeed. 

      <P>Execute the line. 
      <P>If the executed code set the <TT>$@</TT> error message variable, 
      display the error message as a warning.</TT></P></TD></TR></TBODY></TABLE>
<P>
<TABLE cellSpacing=0 cellPadding=0 border=0>
  <TBODY>
  <TR>
    <TD bgColor=black><FONT color=#fffaa0 size=4><B>
      <P>Listing 13.2-13LST02.PL - Using Perl Interactively</B></FONT></P></TD></TR>
  <TR>
    <TD bgColor=#fffaa0><B><PRE><BR>
<P>do {
    print("&gt; ");
    chop($_ = &lt;&gt;);
    eval($_);
    warn() if $@;
} while ($_ ne "exit");</B></P></PRE></TT></TD></TR></TBODY></TABLE>
<P>When you run this program, you will see a <TT>&gt;</TT> prompt. At the 
prompt, you can type in any Perl code. When you press Enter, the line is 
executed. You can even define functions you can use later in the interactive 
session. The program can be stopped by typing <TT>exit</TT> at the command line. 

<P>If you like powerful command-line environments, you can build on this small 
program to create a personalized system. For example, you might need to perform 
a backup operation before leaving work. Instead of creating a batch file (under 
DOS) or a shell file (under UNIX), you can add a new command to the Perl 
interactive program, as in Listing 13.3. 
<P>
<TABLE cellSpacing=0 cellPadding=0 border=0>
  <TBODY>
  <TR>
    <TD bgColor=black><FONT color=blanchedalmond 
      size=4><B>Pseudocode</B></FONT></TD></TR>
  <TR>
    <TD bgColor=blanchedalmond><TT>
      <P>Loop until the user enters <TT>exit</TT>. 
      <P>Print the prompt. 
      <P>Get a line of input from <TT>STDIN</TT> and remove the ending linefeed. 

      <P>If the inputted line begins with <TT>do#</TT>, then a custom command 
      has been entered. 
      <P>Process the <TT>do#backup</TT> custom command. 
      <P>See if the user needs help. 
      <P>Otherwise, use the <TT>eval()</TT> function to execute the inputted 
      line. 
      <P>If the executed code set the <TT>$@</TT> error message variable, 
      display the error message as a warning.</TT></P></TD></TR></TBODY></TABLE>
<P>
<TABLE cellSpacing=0 cellPadding=0 border=0>
  <TBODY>
  <TR>
    <TD bgColor=black><FONT color=#fffaa0 size=4><B>
      <P>Listing 13.3-13LST03.PL - An Interactive Perl Interpreter That 
      Understands Custom Commands</B></FONT></P></TD></TR>
  <TR>
    <TD bgColor=#fffaa0><B><PRE><BR>
<P>sub backItUp {
    `backup /user/*`;
    `delete /user/*.bak`
}

sub help {
    print("do#backup will perform the nightly backup\n");
    print("help will display this message.\n\n");
}

do {
    print("&gt; ");
    chop($_ = &lt;&gt;);
    if (/^do#/) {
        backItUp() if /backup/;
    }
    elsif (/^\s*help/) {
        help();
    }
    else {
        eval($_);
        warn() if $@;
    }
} while ($_ ne "exit");</B></P></PRE></TT></TD></TR></TBODY></TABLE>
<P>This program invokes the backup program and deletes the backup files if you 
enter <TT>do#backup</TT> at the <TT>&gt;</TT> prompt. Of course, you need to 
modify this program to perform the customized commands you'd like to have. This 
technique also enables you to centralize your administrative tasks, which will 
make them easier to document and maintain. 
<P>
<TABLE cellSpacing=0 cellPadding=0 border=0>
  <TBODY>
  <TR>
    <TD bgColor=black><FONT color=lightpink size=4><B>Tip</B></FONT></TD></TR>
  <TR>
    <TD bgColor=lightpink>If you are running Perl on a DOS or Windows machine, 
      consider replacing your small batch utility programs with one Perl 
      interpreter and some customized commands. This saves on hard disk space if 
      you use a lot of batch files because each file may take up to 4,096 bytes, 
      regardless of its actual size.</TD></TR></TBODY></TABLE>

## What Is a Signal?

<I>Signals</I> are messages sent by the operating system to the process running your Perl script. 
At any time, a signal that must be answered can be sent to your process. 
Normally, a default handler is used to take care of a signal. For example, under 
Windows 95, when you press the Ctrl+C key combination, your process is sent an 
<TT>INT</TT> or interrupt signal. The default handler responds by ending the 
process and displays the following message: 
<P><B><PRE>^C at test.pl line 22</PRE></B>Of course, the file name and line number 
change to match the particulars of whatever script happens to be running when 
Ctrl+C was pressed. The <TT>^C</TT> notation refers to the Ctrl+C key sequence. 
<H3><A name="Example: How to Handle a Signal">Example: How to Handle a 
Signal</A></H3>You can cause Perl to ignore the Ctrl+C key sequence by placing 
the following line of code near the beginning of your program: 
<P><B><PRE>$SIG{'INT'} = 'IGNORE';</PRE></B>You can restore the default handler like 
this: 
<P><B><PRE>$SIG{'INT'} = 'DEFAULT';</PRE></B>If you need to ensure that files are 
closed, error messages are written, or other cleanup chores are completed, you 
need to create a custom <TT>INT</TT> handle function. For example: 
<P><B><PRE>sub INT_handler {
    # close all files.
    # send error message to log file.
    exit(0);
}

$SIG{'INT'} = 'INT_handler';</PRE></B>If the Ctrl+C key sequence is pressed 
anytime after the hash assignment is made, the <TT>INT_handler</TT> function is 
called instead of the default handler. 
<P>
<TABLE cellSpacing=0 cellPadding=0 border=0>
  <TBODY>
  <TR>
    <TD bgColor=black><FONT color=lightcyan size=4><B>Note</B></FONT></TD></TR>
  <TR>
    <TD bgColor=lightcyan>In theory, you could remove the <TT>exit()</TT> call 
      from the signal handler function, and the script should start executing 
      from wherever it left off. However, this feature is not working on several 
      platforms. If you want to test your platform, run the following small 
      program:</TD></TR></TBODY></TABLE>
<P><B><PRE>sub INT_handler {
    print("Don't Interrupt!\n");
}

$SIG{'INT'} = 'INT_handler';

for ($x = 0; $x &lt; 10; $x++) {
    print("$x\n");
    sleep 1;
}</PRE></B>
<TABLE cellSpacing=0 cellPadding=0 border=0>
  <TBODY>
  <TR>
    <TD bgColor=black><FONT color=lightcyan size=4><B>Note</B></FONT></TD></TR>
  <TR>
    <TD bgColor=lightcyan>You should be able to press Ctrl+C while the script 
      is counting without forcing the script to end.</TD></TR></TBODY></TABLE>
<P>The <TT>%SIG</TT> associative array holds only entries you have created for 
your custom signal handler functions. So, unfortunately, you can't find out 
which signals are supported by looking at the array returned by 
<TT>keys(%SIG)</TT>. 
<P>
<TABLE cellSpacing=0 cellPadding=0 border=0>
  <TBODY>
  <TR>
    <TD bgColor=black><FONT color=lightpink size=4><B>Tip</B></FONT></TD></TR>
  <TR>
    <TD bgColor=lightpink>If you are running Perl on a UNIX machine, you can 
      run the <TT>kill -l</TT> command. This command displays a list of possible 
      signals.</TD></TR></TBODY></TABLE>
<P>I looked directly into the perl.exe file supplied with my Perl distribution 
to find out that the hip port of Perl for Win32 supports the following signals: 
<P>
<UL>
  <LI><TT>ABRT</TT> - This signal means that another process is trying to abort 
  your process. 
  <P></P>
  <LI><TT>BREAK</TT> - This signal indicates that a Ctrl+Break key sequence was 
  pressed under Windows. 
  <P></P>
  <LI><TT>TERM</TT> - This signal means that another process is trying to 
  terminate your process. 
  <P></P>
  <LI><TT>SEGV</TT> - This signal indicates that a segment violation has taken 
  place. 
  <P></P>
  <LI><TT>FPE</TT> - This signal catches floating point exceptions. 
  <P></P>
  <LI><TT>ILL</TT> - This signal indicates that an illegal instruction has been 
  attempted. 
  <P></P>
  <LI><TT>INT</TT> - This signal indicates that a Ctrl+C key sequence was 
  pressed under Windows.</LI></UL>
<P>You can also use the <TT>%SIG </TT>hash to trap a call to the <TT>warn()</TT> 
and <TT>die()</TT> functions. This comes in handy if you're working with someone 
else's code and want to keep a log of whenever these functions are called. 
Rather than finding every place the functions are used, you can define a handler 
function as in Listing 13.4. 
<P>
<TABLE cellSpacing=0 cellPadding=0 border=0>
  <TBODY>
  <TR>
    <TD bgColor=black><FONT color=blanchedalmond 
      size=4><B>Pseudocode</B></FONT></TD></TR>
  <TR>
    <TD bgColor=blanchedalmond><TT>
      <P>Define a handler for the <TT>warn()</TT> function. The error message is 
      passed to the handler as the first element of the <TT>@_</TT> array. 
      <P>Define a handler for the <TT>die()</TT> function. 
      <P>Define the <TT>sendToLogfile()</TT> utility function. 
      <P>Start the signal catching by creating two entries in the <TT>%SIG</TT> 
      hash. 
      <P>Invoke the <TT>warn()</TT> and <TT>die()</TT> 
  functions.</TT></P></TD></TR></TBODY></TABLE>
<P>
<TABLE cellSpacing=0 cellPadding=0 border=0>
  <TBODY>
  <TR>
    <TD bgColor=black><FONT color=#fffaa0 size=4><B>
      <P>Listing 13.4-13LST04.PL - How to Define Signal Handler Functions for 
      the <I>warn()</I> and <I>die()</I> Functions</B></FONT></P></TD></TR>
  <TR>
    <TD bgColor=#fffaa0><B><PRE><BR>
<P>sub WARN_handler {
    my($signal) = @_;
    sendToLogfile("WARN: $signal");
}

sub DIE_handler {
    my($signal) = @_;
    sendToLogfile("DIE: $signal");
}

sub sendToLogfile {
    my(@array) = @_;
    open(LOGFILE, "&gt;&gt;program.log");
    print LOGFILE (@array);
    close(LOGFILE);
}

$SIG{__WARN__} = 'WARN_handler';
$SIG{__DIE__}  = 'DIE_handler';

chdir('/printer') or warn($!);
chdir('/printer') or die($!);</B></P></PRE></TT></TD></TR></TBODY></TABLE>
<P>When this program is done executing, the <TT>PROGRAM.LOG</TT> file contains 
these lines: 
<P><B><PRE></B>WARN: No such file or directory at 13lst02.pl line 22.
DIE: No such file or directory at 13lst02.pl line 23.</PRE></B>

## Summary

Your program's capability to handle error 
conditions that may arise will determine, to a certain extent, how usable your 
program is. If a user of your program finds that it stops working with no error 
messages and, therefore, no way to solve whatever problem has arisen, then your 
program won't be used for long. 
<P>Displaying error messages is also valuable during the programming and 
debugging stage. If you mistakenly type a directory name, it may take you an 
hour to look through the script and find the problem. Handling the <TT>No such 
directory</TT> error correctly in the first place will tell you what the problem 
is and which line of the script has the problem. 
<P>In this chapter, you saw that checking for errors usually means looking at 
the return value of the functions that are called. Some functions set the 
<TT>errno</TT> variable while others simply return true or false. While the 
<TT>errno</TT> variable does have a core set of values that are system 
independent, it also has system-dependent values. Listing 13.1 showed you how to 
display the error values applicable to your system. 
<P>Next, you read about the <TT>or</TT> logical operator. This operator 
evaluates only the right operand if the left is false. Therefore, it is useful 
when testing for unsuccessful functions that return false upon failure. 
<P>The <TT>die()</TT> and <TT>warn()</TT> functions are both used to display an 
error message. In addition, the <TT>die()</TT> function causes the script to 
end. 
<P>Then, the <TT>eval()</TT> function was covered. It is used to execute Perl 
code in a protected environment so that fatal errors will not end the script. 
Any error messages that do arise will be placed into the <TT>$@</TT> special 
variable. All variable value changes and function definitions affect the main 
program. 
<P>Lastly, the signals were covered. Signals are messages sent to a process by 
the operating system. There is a wide range of signals, and they differ 
depending on which operating system you are using. The <TT>%SIG</TT> associative 
array is used to set up your own signal handling function. 
<P>The next chapter discusses object orientation. You learn the definition of an 
object, how to create one, and how to derive new objects from existing objects. 

## Review Questions

<OL>
  <LI>Why is it important to check for errors? 
  <P></P>
  <LI>How is the <TT>die()</TT> function different from the <TT>warn()</TT> 
  function? 
  <P></P>
  <LI>What is the meaning of the <TT>$!</TT> special variable? 
  <P></P>
  <LI>What does the <TT>eval()</TT> function do? 
  <P></P>
  <LI>What is a signal? 
  <P></P>
  <LI>What will the statement <TT>$SIG{'ABRT'} = 'IGNORE'</TT> do?? 
  <P></P>
  <LI>Which signal is used to trap floating point exceptions?</LI></OL>

## Review Exercises

<OL>
  <LI>Write a program that opens a file and uses the <TT>die()</TT> function if 
  an error occurs. 
  <P></P>
  <LI>Write a program that uses the <TT>warn()</TT> function if an existing file 
  will be overwritten by an <TT>open()</TT> statement. 
  <P></P>
  <LI>List three situations where the <TT>warn()</TT> function could be used. 
  <P></P>
  <LI>List three situations where the <TT>die()</TT> function could be used. 
  <P></P>
  <LI>Modify the interactive Perl interpreter to print a version number when the 
  <TT>version</TT> custom command is used. 
  <P></P>
  <LI>Modify the interactive Perl interpreter to save all commands entered into 
  a log file. Add a timestamp to each log entry.</LI></OL>
